And now he's busy recording. Would you like to start by telling us about what Dungeons & Dragons is? Dungeons & Dragons is a RPG that you play with a group of people, usually around a table. They call it a tabletop. And in that RPG you have a sort of game leader, which you call the Dungeon Master, and players. And the players all play a character in a fantasy world. And the Dungeon Master tells what that fantasy world looks like, what happens, depending on what the players do. I think that's the basic idea. You said that Dungeons & Dragons is a RPG, so you can win with Dungeons & Dragons. How do you win and how do you lose? Not really, it's more of a cooperative game. It's more about having fun together than about winning something. That's because it's often set up in a way that the players can choose how and what to play, and that they can set their own goals. In that sense it has more in common with an improvisation tournament than with a game like chess or something like that. Because everyone is free in a way. But I guess that there's usually a sort of... The Dungeon Master, which tells the story, can also set goals for the players. For example, you can try to save the world. And if the players like it, they can try to achieve that goal. That's the closest to winning, I think. So there are goals that the Dungeon Master can set, and goals that the players can set. And one of those would be to save the world. What would you save the world from? From a fantasy world that is conceived by the Dungeon Master. Sometimes it's an existing fantasy world, or a world that someone comes up with. It's an imaginary place, where imaginary characters, countries, cities, or other places appear. And the players can interact with that. For example, they can try to save that world, or try to destroy it. Whatever the goal of the game is. Okay. Here I said that the players can come up with goals themselves. What kind of goals would that be? Are they different from what the Dungeon Master would set as a goal? That's possible. Usually you discuss that with each other. What do you want to do? For example, the simple example of saving the world, is usually a bigger goal, that consists of multiple sub-goals, that the Dungeon Master sets. Sometimes with the help of an existing scenario, sometimes with the help of a self-designed scenario. But within that world, the players can play their own characters, their own personality traits, their own history of those characters. And also think about, this is what my character did in the past, what does he want to do now? For example, he can think that something happened in the past, something he has to solve, he can think about what he wants to achieve, or whatever. Could you give me an example of a goal a player might have? For example, a player has a family song, that something has been done by someone, and they want to take revenge. That can be a goal. Or a player has a character that wants to become very rich, or things like that, and you discuss that with each other. Sometimes you write a background story, or sometimes you just tell the Dungeon Master, this is my character, this is what I want to do. And then the Dungeon Master often ensures, that the player gets certain opportunities, to get involved in that story. For example, by giving an assignment, and when you complete that assignment, you can become very rich. Or by eventually looking for the person, you want to take revenge on, and then perform that. So that's a bit how you can do it, but of course there are many more examples to think about. Yes, okay, clear, thank you. You were talking about the characters in the player's game. How does such a character work? Can you tell me more about that? Yes, of course you play the character, by saying, this is what my character wants to do, in this situation. And in many, in some situations, these are tasks that don't just happen by themselves. Think of, for example, fighting an enemy, or jumping over a ravine, or swimming across something. And for those kinds of tasks, you still have the system of Dungeons & Dragons, and then you get to the game rules.
You call that initiative. That is also a role where you throw a number and add something to it. And you use that outcome to determine what the order of the turn is. So you go to a kind of turn-based mode, in which all players and all characters who are controlled by the DM can take action around the turn. And an action can be, for example, to attack someone with a sword, or to cast a spell, or to do something else. And that's how it goes on, one by one, in the initiative order. Everyone does their thing. You can attack, for example, to cause damage to the opponent. You often roll the other dice for that, which I have described. With that damage, you do it on the opponent. And that depends on his hit points. Hit points is also a number that is on each character's sheet. Strong characters have a lot of hit points. Weak characters have few hit points. And if there are fewer hits, they die. If a player's character has zero hit points, he becomes unconscious. Then you can roll saving throws, which is also a d20 roll. And if you roll eleven or higher, you survive. And if you roll three times less than ten, your character is dead. What happens when your character is dead? That depends. Usually, the character is dead in that world. And the character is out of the game. That means that the player, who often participates, usually invents a new character and joins in again. And sometimes, especially when there are powerful characters in the game, it is possible that someone from the dead will appear again. Or if the DM wants that, he can decide to do that. But there has to be a reason for that. Okay, what kind of reason would that be? That depends on the world in general. Some fantasy worlds have powerful gods. Those gods can decide that this character is not yet ready for this world. And furthermore, they have to fulfill their goals. Think of Gandalf from the Lord of the Rings. Something like that can happen. Or with certain fairytales, you can bring the dead back to life. That is a possibility. But then there have to be powerful characters who are willing to use those fairytales. I think those are the most important reasons. And sometimes the DM can come up with a different reason for that. Okay, that's clear. You were talking about people fighting. Players fighting. And they do damage to their opponents. What kind of opponents do they fight? Do they fight each other? Do they fight another group of players? How does that work? Usually they don't fight each other or other players. It happens, but it's quite rare. Usually the players work together to fight other enemies in the world. Those are other characters. All kinds of characters, including enemy NPCs. Non-player characters. Characters that are not controlled by a player, but by the DM. Those can be wild animals you encounter on the way. Or monsters you encounter somewhere. Or other characters you don't get along with. It can also be NPCs that the players are willing to negotiate with. It doesn't always have to be about fighting. How do you know when you encounter such creatures? The DM describes it. For example, the players decide to go to a certain place in the world. The DM describes what happens on the way. Or what happens at that moment. What can happen is that the characters are on their way to a certain city. And there are bandits on the way that they want to rob. The players move. The DM says that the bandits are pulling their sword. Just roll initiative. That usually means that there will be a fight. What does roll initiative mean? That's what I just explained. That a certain check is rolled. And the number that comes out determines the order of all characters participating in the fight. You mentioned earlier that things are described in the Player's Handbook. Like other actions that players can take in the fight. What kind of actions are those? Both inside and outside of the fight. You can do anything you can think of. Anything that is possible in that world. For example, you can try to chop down a tree. You can try to talk to someone. You can try to seduce someone. You can try to murder someone. You can do anything you can think of. And usually, if it's not something trivial, you should roll a check for that. So roll a d20. Add something to that. And the DM decides if that works or not. And how does the DM decide if that works or not? That depends on the scenario and on the task. Sometimes the scenarios are already thought out in advance. And there are certain parts for which you have to roll a certain number to achieve that. That number is called the difficulty class. Sometimes the DM decides for himself. Or the players do something that wasn't thought out in advance. And then the DM has to decide for himself. For example, to jump over a certain distance, there are certain difficulty classes for that. You can jump that far, depending on your strength or whatever. And some things are less clear how difficult it is to make that happen. For example, trying to convince a different character in the world to take a certain action. That's more difficult to determine from the difficulty class. Because it depends on the action. What do you want him to do? If you want to ask him to jump off a mountain, it's usually impossible. But if you ask him to give you a glass of water, it's almost trivial. Unless the character is hostile to you, for example. In the middle of a fight. Would you like to give me a glass of water? Okay, clear. Cast Tidal Wave. Tidal Wave is a spell that you can cast. Okay, clear. You also talked about items that players can collect. Can you give some examples of that? Yes, players can collect all kinds of items along the way. That they can find, buy or conquer. They can be very simple everyday items. Like a plate and cutlery. Or whatever you can find in the world. And they can also be very special items. For example, magical items that have magical powers. With which players can achieve everything they could achieve with magic. For example, become invisible. Or change shape. Or whatever. Sometimes players can buy those items. Sometimes they can find them. When they come somewhere. And sometimes...
It's pretty standard that you have villages or cities where you also have traders or shops or something like that. Sometimes they are in a place where that is not possible, then they cannot do that. For example, in the middle of the sea you just have to come across a trading ship. In the city it will probably be easier than somewhere in the middle of nowhere. Okay, clear. Is there a specific money system or is it also very variable? In principle, just like with everything, you can invent everything yourself. But there is also a standard system that consists of gold, silver and copper pieces. These are coins that the players can collect, where the silver pieces are worth 10 copper pieces and the gold pieces 10 silver pieces. Okay, clear. We talked earlier about monsters and opponents. Could you tell us a little more about what kind of monsters the players could encounter? That depends on the world. In the world that was invented by the DM or other people, all kinds of creatures live. In Dungeons & Dragons it is usually a fantasy world. That means that there are fantasy creatures such as trolls, elves and also mythological creatures. Or creatures that do not come from anywhere, but are specifically designed for D&D. You can encounter them in the world in certain places. For example, sometimes in the city, sometimes in the wilderness, sometimes underground or underwater. But just where you are going at that moment. Depending on what kind of world you are in. Maybe one world has more dragons and the other world has more creatures from Greek mythology or something like that. If you want to call it an example. Can you play such creatures or do you just play a human being? Yes, you can usually choose. Sometimes the DM gives a number of options. Sometimes you can choose from the options that are also in the Player's Handbook. There are a number of standard creatures that you can play, including humans, elves, dwarves, halflings and things like that. And sometimes, in some settings, the DM sometimes adds creatures himself. In some cases, even the players can come up with things themselves. Usually, when the players come up with things themselves, it goes in harmony with the group. So that it all fits together a bit. And it gives a kind of semi-credible setting. And that's usually how people do it. For example, in a setting that revolves around Greek mythology, a player can play a centaur or a satyr. While in a more medieval fantasy setting, which is more based on Tolkien, people can be elves or dwarves. So yes, that's where it all comes from. Okay, got it. We already talked about a character sheet. That's where your stats and proficiencies are. What else is there? So what kind of creature you are. Your race, as we call it. Even though it's not really a race, but it can also be a strange kind of creature. Your class is on it. Your hitpoint. Your levels. Levels are a kind of... ...a measure of the skill of your character in a certain class. So you can be a level 1 rogue, a level 10 wizard. Or one of the two. Or you can be a level 5 fighter. Usually those levels are between 1 and 20. That's the standard. Sometimes there are expansions where you can go up to level 30. And every level you get higher, you get extra skills for your character. Usually the characters start at a lower level. And they get new levels when they complete tasks. Or do certain things. For example, completing quests. Defeating enemies, or whatever. And how do you determine how many levels someone goes up? When you do something. Usually it's not when you do one thing. But usually when a bigger task is completed. Or a certain time has passed in the game. The DM determines that the whole party goes level up. That's one possibility. Sometimes you can split it up into smaller things. And the DM gives experience for completing smaller tasks. Which are certain points. And if you count those points together. And from certain numbers in the experience points. Your character has a certain level. So if you have enough XP, you go up a level. Yes, if you start at level 1, you start with 0 XP. And as soon as a character reaches 300 XP, they go to level 2. Okay, understood. And what happens when you go up a level? You get extra skills. Depending on the class you take a level in. That means you get more hit points. Sometimes you get abilities or proficiencies that get bigger. So you can roll higher on your D20. Because a higher number is added. If you're a magician, you can cast new spells. Or if you're a fighter, you learn a special attack. I think those are the most important things. Okay, you said you get skills for the class you take a level in. But that's your own class, right? For example, if you start at level 1. Then you have one class. And you have one level in that class. If you reach level 2, you can choose between level 2 in that class. Or level 1 in another class. You call that a multi-class. And that's a player's choice. So you can have multiple classes. Is there a limit? Or can you save all classes? Yes, you can do that. But different classes have different skills. Like I said, a wizard needs intelligence. A bard needs charisma. A fighter needs strength or dexterity. And if you're in all classes, it's harder to be good at something. So you're a wizard who can do everything, but can't be good at anything. That can be frustrating for some players. If their character can't do a lot of things. So it would be good to have multiple classes that fit together. That's true. Or people choose one class and always stay in that class. All of that is possible. Some editions have certain restrictions on which classes you can enter. For example, you need to have a certain ability score before you can join that class. Okay, I see. Can those ability scores change while you play? Or are they fixed from the start? As I said, you can roll or buy those with points. If you level up, you can increase those. And there are some magic spells or other effects that can temporarily improve or worsen an ability. But other than that, it's pretty fixed. So you can't say halfway through the game, I have so much money now, I can buy more. No. You do everything in consultation anyway. And in general, the dungeon master says what you can or can't do. So if a player says, I'm buying something expensive that I can't pay. Then the dungeon master says, you don't have that much money. The seller doesn't accept it and doesn't give you the item. So the players really interact as if they are in that world. With the world around them. Okay, I see. You mentioned hit points. How do you determine how many hit points a character has? Does everyone have the same number of hit points? That depends on your class. Each level in a class gives a certain hit die. Which is a double stone with a number of sides. For example, from the row of 4, 6, 8, 10 or 12. In general, fighting classes have more hit points than magicians. In addition, you add your constitution bonus. Often per level. And your constitution bonus is the one of your statistics? Yes, that's the ability score. The ability score, okay. Okay, clear. I've gone through my questions. Do you have anything else you think we missed? Probably. Usually with this kind of thing, you only know how it works when you play it. And you come across things that have not yet been treated. That's why it's difficult to give a complete overview. For example, if the players try to do something that's not in the book, you have to improvise a lot. I think that's something that both players and DM do a lot. Players have to improvise a lot to think about what to do. What's happening now? What's the consequence of this action? Sometimes, by playing it more often, you have an idea of what kind of things are in the book and what aren't. And which ones aren't in the book. That's something the DM should think about. What's happening at that moment. That's part of the fun, I think. People have to be very creative. In solving the tasks they get or that they set themselves. As well as in thinking about how they react at that moment. How they roleplay their character, as it's called. As for the DM, where the challenge lies in how you describe the world. How do you describe the consequences of the players performing a certain action? And how do you make sure that it's fun for everyone? Okay. I would say let's end the interview here. Thank you very much.
